Source: https://existentialcomics.com/comic/5


Title: A Dialog with a Madman


Pane 1 (dialogWithAMadman_one.jpg):

Two people are stranded on a deserted island.


Pane 2:

Amentia (A): Tell me Sanus, what is the primacy of knowledge? What is
the source of all sources upon which *TRUTH* is built?

Sanus (S): Our *EXPERIENCE* of the world, surely.


Pane 3:

A: No no! That simply cannot be, for such experience cannot even found
itself, much less all that is known!

A: Experience is the most untrustworthy of all knowledge. I am a
madman as you know, so I cannot trust what I see to be true in the
least, lest I also be a fool...


Pane 4:

A: How can experience found truth when it cannot itself be known as
true? You think yourself quite sane, but what you see cannot be
trusted any more than my MAD VISIONS.

A: Long have we lingered on this island, perhaps you are as mad as I,
only your hubris keeps you from knowing it!

S: I assure you, Amentia, I am quite sane. When I look at the world, I
see it clearly; of course I can't see reality directly, but I can
still have inferences about reality from what I see. That is what we
call knowledge.


Pane 5:

A: Is that so? And pray tell, friend Sanus, if in a moment you saw a
distant boat on the horizon, what would you do?


Pane 6:

S: Why, I would cry for joy that we might be saved at last, of course!


Panes 7, 8, 9:

A: Ahh, but you would not. Your first cry would not be of jubilation,
but of *doubt*, this much I do know. For you too know your mind cannot
be trusted. Before your heart dared to celebrate your tongue would cry
out: "Amentia, do you see that *SHIP* over there?!"  Only then, with
my confirmation, would your elation arrive to the scene!


Pane 10:

A: However if I said to you that there was nothing but blue sky and
blue water, your *DOUBT* would take you.


Pane 11:

A: You would say perhaps your mind has hoped too much for itself and
created this boat all on ITS *OWN*.


Pane 12:

S: Yes, perhaps we cannot always believe what we see, but if you
confirmed you saw it too, I would be comforted in thinking a boat was
indeed there.


Pane 13 (dialogWithAMadman_two.jpg):

A: *Ha!* So you admit it, your foundation of knowledge is nothing more
than the word of a *MADMAN!* Comforted indeed! Even if my mind were
lucid in that moment, I am as cruel as I am mad. I may see plainly
there is no boat and agree with you simply out of spite or malice.

A: So you must trust me twice, that I am sane and that I am
honest. Sanus, my friend, you trust entirely too much, I assure you I
deserve no such honor. When you say you trust your senses you mean you
trust them only insofar as OTHERS confirm that they are so.

S: You can't be trusted to steer the DAMN BOAT while I sleep, I'll
give you that.


Pane 14:

A: So you see it is not yourself but others that found your
knowledge. But all others are merely a part of your own senses, so you
are relying on your own senses of others to confirm as true your
senses of the world, which is not a sound foundation in the least! It
is nothing more than CIRCULATION!

A: No, my friend, it is reason alone that can be trusted to always be
steady and certain. It must alone also be the source of all
knowing. Two and two is always four, whether you confirm it for me or
not.


Pane 15:

S: No, Amentia, it cannot be reason, for reason only makes connections
between facts, events or previously devised reasonings. Thus without
first having observed the facts, and witnessed the events, it cannot
begin to begin. If man had not first experienced the sky, he never
could have deduced the clouds from *nothing!*

S: You say two and two is always four, but from where do you get this
idea? Not originally from reason certainly, never would such things
have entered the minds of men had they not first seen objects in the
world. Distinct things which could be counted were observed by the
senses, men wanted to keep track of them, and so they invented the
rules of counting so they might not be cheated by their neighbor of a
debt.


Pane 16:

S: You cannot found reason from reason, for what would you first take
to be true so you could deduce further things?

S: What axioms of knowledge would have any advantage over any others
if you had not first observed facts in the world?


Pane 17:

S: All reason and logic is thus a TAUTOLOGY, it cannot create new
knowledge! It can only discover knowledge which you had assumed from
your premises, but you had not yet realized it.


Pane 18:

A: So perhaps there is no foundation of knowledge. Perhaps we are all
drifting in a sea of MADNESS, only thinking we know truths because
other fools repeat them back to us.

S: What a sad affair.


Pane 19:

A: Not so sad for us though, my friend. It gives us another hope of
rescue besides the boat that we both know will never come.

A: Perhaps this is all just a mad dream, of which one of us will awake
from with a start, and the other will vanish back into the
SUBCONSCIOUSNESS of the first.


Pane 20:

S: Yes, now that you mention it, we have survived a suspiciously long
time off scant few coconuts and no fresh water...
